# rda-bufr-decode-ADPupa

This project contains Fortran source code to read BUFR data files containing
NCEP ADP upper air observations, which are archived and available for download
in the [NCAR Research Data Archive (RDA) dataset ds351.0](https://rda.ucar.edu/datasets/ds351.0/).
The ds351.0 archive contains NCEP ADP upper air data observations, including 
ADPUPA, AIRCFT, AIRCAR, and SATWND observations, for the time period 1999 - present.

## Usage
After compiling the source code, the executable can be run with the command
```
bufrupperair.x <BUFR input file> <output file> <configuration file>
```
For example:
```
bufrupperair.x ../bufrobs/gdas.adpupa.t00z.20210701.bufr ../textobs/gdas.adpupa.t00z.20210701.txt ../configs/bufrupperair.config
```
## Directory structure
The directories provided in this project are as follows:
```
bufrobs/     Can be used to store BUFR input data files for the decoder.

configs/     Contains a descriptive template and example configuration
                files to be used as input to the decoder.

docs/        Contains files showing some basic parameter mnemonics
                and a link to recent NCEP BUFR tables.

exe/         Directory containing the decoder executables.

install/     Contains a shell script for compiling and installing BUFR
                decoders.

src/         Contains two FORTRAN BUFR decoder source code files:
                1) a flexible, user configurable program and 2) a simple
                program for dumping BUFR output.

textobs/     Can be used to store text files generated by the decoders.
```
## Detailed instructions
The following lists the steps necessary to build the software and
decode the BUFR data. Steps include preparing the decoder software, preparing 
the configuration files, and finally running the decoder software.

1.  Preparing the decoder software:

    To compile the BUFR libraries and extraction code, go to the `/install`
    directory and run the `install.sh` script to complete the compilations.  

    Note: `install.sh` uses `gfortran` to compile and link the source code.  This 
    is tested and works for Linux platforms, but may require adjustments for 
    other operating systems.

    After compiling, the executables will be placed in the
    `/exe` directory.  These can be copied to an arbitrary directory,
    e.g. `~/bin`, for your convenience.

    Executables built by `install.sh`:
    ```
    exe/bufrupperair.x:  used to make a selective dump from ADPUPA, AIRCFT, AIRCAR, and/or SATWND BUFR files
                             - gdas.adpupa.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr
                             - gdas.aircft.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr
                             - gdas.satwnd.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr
                             - gdas.aircar.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr 

    exe/dumpbufr.x:      used to dump all contents of a BUFR file.
    ```

2.  Preparing the input files:

    BUFR files can be placed in the `bufrobs/` directory for convenience
    
    File names in the NCAR RDA dataset ds351.0 are of the following form:
          gdas.adpupa.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr          (ADPUPA: radiosondes and pibals)
          gdas.aircft.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr          (AIRCFT: aircraft) 
          gdas.satwnd.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr          (SATWND: satellite winds)
          gdas.aircar.tHHz.YYYYMMDD.bufr          (AIRCAR: aircar)
        
3.  Preparing the configuration file:
 
    Go to the `configs/` directory and create your configuration file following 
    the instructional template and examples on how to build a configuration file.
    
4.  Running the decoder software:

    To decode the BUFR data according to the instructions in your configuration file,
    run the `exe/bufrupperair.x` executable with the input BUFR file, output file, and 
    configuration file provided as command line arguments. For example:
    ```
    bufrupperair.x ../bufrobs/gdas.adpupa.t00z.20210701.bufr ../textobs/gdas.adpupa.t00z.20210701.txt ../configs/bufrupperair.config
    ```

    To generically dump output from an individual file, run the `exe/dumpbufr.x` 
    executable.  From here you will be prompted to enter the name of the input
    BUFR file (including path) from which you would like all output to be printed. 

## Additional information

The NCEP BUFRLIB software library is required to compile and run these programs, and it 
is recommended to compile and install BUFRLIB with the same compiler you use to compile 
the source code in this project.  The BUFRLIB software and installation instructions are 
provided on the [NCEP BUFRLIB support page](https://emc.ncep.noaa.gov/emc/pages/infrastructure/bufrlib.php).
